Alright,
Well, why don't we get started? We're missing one or two people, but let's get going anyways.
So, welcome everybody to lecture number two in applied earth economy modeling. And, so today, we're going to be diving right into the key topic, which is, introducing what is Earth Economy Modeling itself.
And so the agenda for today…
I first want to have a very brief little discussion of course requirements and ways to succeed.
But then we'll dive right into the reading and discuss what you saw in there, which is the definition of earth economy modeling, but also the sort of historical emergence and taxonomy, or organization of the field.
We'll sort of then talk about two specific examples that I think have been important about this, AEM and GTAP Invest.
And throughout, we'll be discussing the reading. I'll have a few interactive questions.
And I'm really hoping, you know, it's always awkward at the beginning of the semester, especially with multiple languages as preferred, first languages, to get discussion, but this is going to be critical, okay? So I'll try to have plenty of time with the question on the board, before we really dive in, but you all are going to be experts on this, becoming experts, that's the goal.
And so you need to know how to be able to talk about this.
Okay, so just a first discussion on, expectations for this class, and what does it mean to succeed?
So, you know, we had the syllabus, we talked through it very briefly, but you might be wondering, oh shoot, am I the sort of person that can succeed in this class? And I want to talk through what that means and what it'll look like, and some of the expectations related to this.
So the first one is… I didn't say this before in the syllabus, so it's okay for those of you who, didn't have this known in advance, but, in-person attendance.
will be required for all credit-seeking members. So, just, you may notice that there is a good number of people in this class who are auditors. And the reason for this is because this is a new and increasingly interesting, or emergent research field that lots of people want to attend, and so about half of us aren't actually taking it for credit.
And so I'm encouraging that. The university allows that.
But it makes for a little bit of asymmetry in the class, so if you are taking this for credit, like, for the program, you're one of the credit-seeking members, you'll get academic credits for this. You'll have, number one, to do the assignments, and number two, I'm starting next class, I would like everybody to come in person, and if you're not going to be in person.
Just shoot me an email. Of course, you know, we're… we can be flexible, but we really do need to emphasize the in-person nature of this.
Next up,
you know, in terms of skills needed to succeed, there is actually not that much math needed for this course. In previous incantations of this… incarnations of this course, when it was more traditional natural resource economics, it's actually one of the most mathematics-intensive courses
In APEC, Dynamic Programming, Optimal Control, and
the… much of that math is now going to be in the 8601 of the Economics of Sustainability and Dynamics that Steve Pulaski will teach.
And this one, we chose to make the applied one. Now, I'm not saying math can't be applied, but one of the ways that math is often applied is in code, right?
And so, there will not be hardly any math, but we will all have our computers with us and work through examples and problem sets, etc, that will be very code-centric. And so, what does it mean to succeed, given that? We're actually assuming no prior coding experience.
It should be just fine, especially with the emergence of large language models, chat GPT, etc. Coding and learning how to code really has gotten easier. There's some deeper questions, like, is that the right way to learn? You know, if you're always relying on a large language model, you might not learn the nuances.
That's an important question. But for now, I will be hoping to focus you on the parts you do need to learn, but then things like syntax, like, do you need a semicolon at the end of a programming line? That
that you can get from whatever your preferred large language model is. But so what I would say is, because we're not assuming any coding background, I think if you put in the time, you'll be very, very likely to succeed, get the A, etc. So that's kind of my thought.
The other thing to note is that discussions will be taking place in class.
Occasionally, we will pull in remote folks.
But because the credit-seeking members are going to be in person, going forward, we will mostly focus those discussions on the people in class, and so if you're remote, sorry, it's just hard to balance two things. If you want to be involved, come on in person, or if you really, really need to say something, I'll bend the rules, whatever, just speak up.
Okay. Any questions about course expectations? I…
some of the… I should say, some of the details will still be finalized, like, when is the midterm? I'm still working on this stuff, so bear with me for that. But any other questions in general about succeeding here, or that have come up from the syllabus?
Anybody feeling confident?
I had strong faith in y'all, yeah?
It'll be primarily Python.
But one of the days will be in Julia, but that will be no problem. Because we'll have, basically, starter code that you'll be able to get from the course repo, and that'll run as is. The main quote-unquote programming that you will be doing will be, like, editing the input parameters. Like, if there's a variable called discount underscore rate.
equals 3, and then I ask you a question, like, change the discount rate of the model to 5. You don't need to be an expert in Julia, or Python, or R, or whatever to get that. So the…
coding is becoming sort of like, especially with LLMs, almost language agnostic. Once you get good at the concept of programming, the language itself.
starts to not matter as much. I know that's kind of scary, though, too, because they seem scary. I have faith that it'll work, okay? So… and if not, reach out early. And you got a question?
If that helps.
You should have said, history.
That will be much more relevant in the 8601 class. This is applied. There will be times where I might
be unable to resist the temptation to make connections to the math, but the emphasis of this course is not the math. We will not be solving Bellman equations, or doing fixed-point theorems, or anything like that. And so if you are interested in that, that's definitely in the 8601 course.
Any other questions?
Right.
Any questions online? I know I just said don't say anything, but I'll still call out to you once in a while. Okay.
Oh, hey, Haranom, I didn't see you join. Welcome, welcome.
Good.
Okay, so let's dive in.
to the content. Did everybody read the reading?
That's critical. Good. The reading there is going to be what we talk about for the rest of this class, and it introduces the concept of Earth economy modeling.
You may have noticed that some people from our department were on that one, so Steve and I were the key authors there. Other ones, like Becky Chaplin Kramer is from the Natural Capital Project that a lot of us know, and so we got tasked by annual reviews
Of writing this up. Like, they… they actually reach out to author groups, like, hey, we've identified a new thing in the literature that we need to have an official annual review of.
So we decided to take up that challenge, and this, in some senses, was our, like, official introductory paper for everybody, like, what is earth economy modeling?
And… The basic idea is that humans now.
especially given climate change and biodiversity loss that are driven by economic activity, we, as we discussed last lecture, are pushing up against some of those planetary boundaries, and that could be a problem. And I argued, last class, or yesterday lecture, that
Yeah, I'm not going to that meeting. That,
The inability to have a navigational system to help us make decisions, figure out what policies work in this context where we're pushing up against planetary boundaries, that's a problem.
And the sort of basic reason why we don't have models in this space, or don't have enough.
Is that the Earth systems and the economic systems have traditionally been modeled in isolation.
And so, yes, we have DSGEs that have Bellman equations, etc. There are… those are typically very removed from the environment. And so when I said the economy was apart from the biosphere, there's nothing in those traditional DSGEs that, that include the linkage to the environment.
There are some that we will address, of course, but traditionally these are two separate realms.
This is a problem, though, and we will need to integrate them. And so let me… I'm just gonna draw some stuff on the board.
I had a marker. There it is. I think hopefully this will work for the people online, too. But we're going to keep referring to this basic idea of how we can organize our models.
If you say economy.
The domain of equations, supply and demand, etc. You know, you can think about circular flow in here. I'll show different versions. But this is just going to be the stuff that predicts
changes in prices, supply and demand, etc. What we're arguing with Earth economy modeling is that There are different…
environmental models.
That are also relevant. And so, the question is, how do we integrate these? And a key thing that was identified early on, and by early I mean 2017, so this is not… this is a new discipline, is that much of the linkage
Before, that had been analyzed by natural resource economics or environmental economists is What you call impacts.
And so, you know, what are impacts? Like, deforestation, or pollution, or all the sort of keynote things that you'd think of in the history of environmental protection, chemicals, toxic spills.
All of these are examples of the economy having an impact on the environment, and thereby, if you wanted to understand them, most of what was done was thinking about how can the outputs of an economic model, like economic growth, etc.
be registered as impacts on the environment. And this really did work well, especially when, we were focusing on how, externalities or other, basically, problems of common property management or other related things
were not working well. However, when the size of the economy gets larger and larger, and we start to get closer to pushing planetary boundaries.
A second linkage becomes important.
dependencies.
And sometimes I might even, you know, I didn't space my letters very well, but we might even call these impacts.
Independencies.
This is, whereby a change in the environment now is actually affecting the economy.
In old conceptions of economics that did think about the environment, pretty much the only dependency that was thought about was running out of resources, or, like, having to drill deeper into the ground, and that's expensive to get the oil out. And so, I'm not saying this wasn't thought about before, but it was mostly thought about from the perspective of resource extraction.
And what we… what we see is in this domain of challenging
biodiversity and climate change crises. We need integrated models that capture this two-way interaction between nature and the economy, and to include all of the types of linkages, not just resource extraction.
Okay, so when we wrote this paper, you know, one of the terrifying things about writing a paper that's claiming a new thing is that you have to be really certain nobody else has done it before, right? And so, you know, this is, essentially a huge literature,
reading problem. And so we, in this paper, we actually did spend a little bit of time trying to place the development of earth economy modeling in the existing literature. In the history of this, there were a couple of initial strands,
And that would be, number one, resource allocation over time.
And so when I talked about, you know, mining up minerals or extracting oil, the natural resource economics that one typically learns is going to be based on what is the optimal allocation of efforts over time to extract something based on all the other things that might change, like prices or scarcity.
And Steve will be talking about these more, but there's some very famous models that maybe many of you have seen. The Faustman model, or the hotelling Model. These all have fascinating dynamics, fascinating mathematics.
That are relevant to, you know, the forestry or mineral extraction problems.
Those are the earliest ones. How do we optimally extract resources?
They also evolved to bioeconomic models.
ones that thought about the optimal extraction of, say, fisheries. And this is different because
you need a little bit more information about the biology of fish, for instance. It really depends. You can't just, you know, extracting minerals is relatively simple compared to fish, which will move around, and you have to think about their population dynamics.
So that started the… a lot of the movement towards linking the environment in. But even still, those bioeconomic models at the time were mostly single biological resources that were being considered, and not linked into the whole ecosystem, and definitely not linked into the whole economy.
And so that's what natural resource economics largely refer to.
The second strand… Is, being…
process of placing a monetary value, so valuation, on environmental goods. A lot of work, starting as early as the 60s.
Was spent trying to think what is a solid, quantitative method for putting a dollar value on nature.
And this is…
Something that… it's really cool. If you like econometrics, things like travel cost analysis, that's a really good approach. We're not going to dive into these, but just to indicate what they are, that would be, like, could we infer the value of nature by asking how much would a person spend on travel, say, to get to the, to get to the park, essentially, to consume those resources? And so that would be…
One way of putting a dollar value on it.
hedonic analysis, is another very common one. We could use econometric models to say, how does the value of a nice scenery increase the value of a house? And so the… as long as you can figure out the causality here, and that's the hard part, if you can do that, you can then attribute the
increase in value to the house,
to the environmental amenities that it offers. There's a huge amount of literature on this, and that will mostly be under Jay Coggins, 8603. And so he'll talk about environmental economics, and valuation will be a key part of that.
the… I list it here, though, because that was… the connection of this first strand and second strand, that was sort of the full domain of all the things that environmental economists really thought about. I'm obviously simplifying it, but there was little emphasis on either of these on the broader connection of all of them.
There's maybe one area that is…
different than what I just said, that did think very early on about the connections between these two things, but it came from a group of people that were not economists.
It came from people that studied systems dynamics, or basically engineering and optimization. And they, this developed at the same time as the rest of environmental economics.
but came from a very different angle, and very importantly, they looked at it from the perspective of could we use computers to answer questions about the environment and the economy? And so, there was a huge paper that was written called The Limits to Growth in 1972.
And this used computer-based systems dynamics modeling, specifically the World3 model, and I'll actually… we'll run the World3 model. It's really simple, and now, you know, it was…
a huge advance at the time, but now it's so fun, you can go to GitHub and download any one of 10 versions of it, and we'll play around with it. But at the time, it was earth-shatteringly new. It simulated the feedback loops between population, resources, pollution, and its key conclusions were that unchecked economic and population growth could lead to ecological collapse.
And so, this was kind of the first time that we had a quantitative estimate that tried to say, yes, environmental problems, like impacts, are an issue, but we may actually undercut the natural capital, although they didn't have that word yet, the natural conditions that were necessary for our economies to continue.
And so, who's sort of Thomas Malthus?
Anybody? Yeah, yeah? He was an old thinker. He was a person who noticed that, or at least argued that, the populations tend to grow exponentially, but food production only linearly. And he predicted that, therefore, we would have
always, this, what he called the Malthusian… well, he didn't say that, other people did, sorry. That would be very presumptuous if he named it the Malthusian Principle. But the idea that populations will always grow until the production of food limits them. And so, in other words, that's kind of a really
sad prediction for the state of the world is that we'll always be right at the starvation level, basically. But this limits-to-growth model was essentially giving some mathematics that expressed this same idea, is that population is going to grow so much, we're going to push our limits, it'll be more than just food, it'll be also, like, resources, do we have enough copper to actually wire up our electrical system?
To even grow the food in the first place.
And this, basically scared a lot of people. One of the…
papers that arose after that, is called The Population Bomb from a guy called Paul Ehrlich. This is another influential paper that basically said population is going to cause the collapse, and he predicted widespread starvation within 20 years.
That was more than 20 years ago, he was wrong. And actually, there's a really great book if you want to read it. It's called The Vet.
Paul Ehrlich, this sort of doomer, doom and gloom person who believed we're all gonna die, not all of us, but many of us, got into an argument with an environmental economist of the time, named Julian Simon.
And he was a much more traditional economist who said, no, I don't think we're going to run out of resources. I think the market is going to respond. The scarcity of the resources that do start to get depleted will cause the price to go up.
And this will cause substitution to other things, and the ingenuity of humankind will solve the problem.
Anyways, the book, The Bet, it's a full-length book that goes through, the debate between these two folks, which ultimately, resulted in literally a bet, where they chose a set of, I forget how many, 5 or 10, different mineral resources. And, these are ones that Paul Ehrlich and others were saying, we're gonna run out.
And Julian Simon was saying, no, we won't. And the bet was whether or not, in some point in the future, a specific date, the price of… the average price of these commodities, would it be higher or lower than it was before.
And, you know, if we were running out of resources, the prices would go to infinity, perhaps. But if, as Julie and Simon argued, the higher prices would induce more people to go searching for minerals, or finding more minerals, the price may not go up.
Turned out, Julian Simon was totally right. He actually received a $1,000 check from Paul Ehrlich, and that was an interesting exchange. However, it's been such an important one that it's also been analyzed over time, and I think Julian Simon also got a little lucky, that if you look at any different window of time, a lot of those prices have gone up.
But regardless, this is a really fun book that illustrates the sort of difference of approaches between, essentially, non-economists.
who are like, we are gonna hit limits, it's really gonna hurt, to economists, they're like, hey, everything is substitutable, not a big problem. We can find ways to innovate our way out and use different things to solve the problem.
Okay, so that's kind of like the setting.
But then, in this domain of using computer models to simulate the environment, we had a huge increase in complexity of the models over time. And…
You'll hear me refer again and again to what I call the computational budget.
And what this means…
Do you spend?
your CPU time, your computer time, We just call it computers.
on… well, increasing the complexity, but what I'll argue is that
You can spend that computational budget on more complex economics, Or… more complex.
Environmental models.
And at the time when the World 3 model was the cutting edge, it was a teeny tiny model. It now solves in, like, less than a tenth of a second, but at the time, it was very challenging to solve that model, and it was kind of funny, the whole discourse around it was, like.
computers figured this out, and everybody was like, okay, if computers figured it out, that must mean it's true.
Since then, our model, our computers are now millions of times faster. We have a lot more computation budget. We can spend more time thinking about more equations that describe the economy, like
more sectors.
for Regents, Or, we could spend that computational budget on having More complex physical processes.
Or… even just… More resolution.
And I literally mean spatial resolution mostly, although it could be something like temporal resolution, or time steps. And as the computation we had access to grew millions of times, we could have ever more complicated models come around.
And this is what we argued in our paper that we had you read today, Earth Economy Modeling and Annual Reviews.
We put forth this sort of key figure, is that there are two axes. You know, I suppose I should stay on this one so that it makes it visible to the people in line. Sorry about that, you couldn't see what I had over there. It was over there.
But we'll refer to this space again and again, so I want to draw it out.
Is this creates a frontier.
I use the word frontier in the way economists do when we say production possibilities frontier. It's what you learn in Econ 101, right, is that you can have more guns and butter, and you can think about how much you could produce of the different combinations of physical goods.
But the idea that a frontier exists can work for non-specific production goods, and so we'll just say this is going to be the
economic complexity.
And this one will be the… environment complexity.
And, you can think about it as being a process of…
trying to get out and to the right by differently choosing to spend our computational budget on one thing or another. And so, suppose you had a certain amount of time to compute a model. You could spend it all on the economics model.
And there are some econ models that take days and days to solve, even with current computers. And so, a model that was right here would be one that is all econ, and it doesn't have very much complexity on the environment. Basically, because it used up all of its time on the econ components, there's nothing available to spend on the environment.
Maybe even more common is there's tons of environmental models, like… hydrology.
climate.
etc. Ones that also take days and days of supercompute time to try to estimate, you know, what might happen for a specific physical phenomenon.
What we argued in this paper is that there's different domains of types of models that differently spend the computational budget. And so, some of the ones that we'll talk about
CGEs… I'll define all these, don't worry. IAMs… Ecosystem services, down here.
That's better.
starts to fill out this space, and the overall goal of Earth Economy Modeling
More of both.
Is how can we…
use the fact that we have ever more computation resources to move up into this area here. We identified four models that were EE earth economy adjacent, but really recognizing that the frontier is even farther. That's where we want to get. Models that can fully incorporate the detail necessary that we can make
Important predictions about the key things that matter.
Okay.
First, a side note, how did we identify these models? That was kind of fun. We, basically, you saw the algorithm in the paper, but basically it was… we had a couple of papers that had lists of models in them. This seeded an algorithm. We searched each of those models, referenced in those papers.
and read every single… I'm sorry, didn't read. We then took every single PDF cited by those and fed that into an algorithm, asking a large language model to say, what are the 50 most similar models to the one documented in this PDF? And then we iterated through that list of PDFs.
And whenever it identified a model, we added it to the bottom of the list as a new model to be considered. We then… here's the hard part, is we actually checked each one of those.
So, you know, LLMs hallucinate still, right? Well, they're really good at finding things that might exist, but then we had to do the hard work of seeing, do they actually exist? And so, we chose 50 most similar models, because in most cases, there weren't 50 similar models. And instead, the first 10 or 20 were real models. We'd go visit their website, read the paper, download the code, etc. Although eventually we'd get to, like, the 20th model, and it would start hallucinating.
hallucinating things, like models that should exist but don't. And so we, instead of being, regarding this as a problem, we regarded that as a methodology. We took each of these lists and went until it hallucinated, and then added the new models that it found to the bottom of the list.
So, that was kind of fun. It went way faster than reading, so we were able to synthesize thousands of papers into 119 models that were actually relevant.
And, you know, we also then coupled this with a systematic literature review, the more traditional type, which is you go to Scopus or some other large database of publications and have a really formal search string, essentially, to say, you know, give me all the papers that have the word econ plus biodiversity plus whatever. And so we did that, too.
just to sanity check this. And, you know, indeed, we saw this number of publications increasing over time that fit our criteria, which were, ones that had both economic modeling and environmental modeling.
As well as high-resolution representation of the problems, and it actually had to have code and documentation, so it couldn't just be a theoretical model.
Okay.
Anyways, I thought that was kind of fun. It was able to go much faster than a traditional review, which could take multiple months of a postdoc's time or something to actually read all of them, so…
Anyways…
With this, though, we… I want to have a slight deviation, on one of the subsets of the models that we identified. That's going to be ecosystem services.
You may have heard this word before, Like, in last lecture.
But this is a fundamental concept that here at the University of Minnesota, we had a pretty central role in popularizing, and it's based on this idea that sustainable human well-being requires accounting for the value of natural capital and the ecosystem services that flow from it.
And so, what do you notice about these words? Number one, natural capital. It's got that word capital. Economists, obviously, love talking about capital. That's why I have this figure here. You know, we… traditional models think about built capital, growth models of capital as an input to production.
A lot of the research in the last 50 years has been thinking about human capital, also some on social capital, like, how can we have institutions we can trust?
Why do economists like doing this? It's because our econ tools work really well when we're thinking about capital accumulation. That's the basic story for how economies have grown.
And natural capital builds on that same sort of route forward of trying to express a broader domain of stuff
In this language that economists use.
Another one…
is a tightly related term, ecosystem services. So backing up a second, ignore the environment. In traditional econ models.
You have capital, and the definition of services is the flow of value that can be obtained from the use of that capital. So it's a very specific word. We're not going to get into that, other than to say that ecosystem services
follows that same terminology. It's the flow of value
To humans, so it has to be attributed to somebody that comes from the stock of natural capital.
So, putting in some keywords here, it's a stock-flow relationship, just like you can have the amount of…
wealth that a country has versus the amount of flow of value in and out of that economy over time. We can have the same thing. We have some sort of stock of natural capital, and that's going to be the Earth's ecosystems and biodiversity that are the basis of sustainable human well-being.
But then ecosystem services are the valuable benefits to humans from that natural capital.
And so, the idea of ecosystem services
Has really caught on, and there's been tons of different ways of describing what all are the different ecosystem services.
We'll have a whole lecture focused on this, but I'm introducing it now, because it's been one of the linchpins of making progress in Earth economy modeling. But the basic idea is that we have
Provisioning services, those are the easiest, like fish, wood. These are things that have market prices that we sell.
Supporting services like photosynthesis, soil formation. We probably wouldn't have very good agriculture if we didn't have good soil being formed by the physical processes of matter breaking down. You don't have to write these all down, we will go through them in depth in a subsequent lecture, but just to
places there. We also have regulating services, like storing carbon. Why is that important? Well, if we don't store any carbon in our trees, our climate will not be so good. So it regulates the climate, keeps it in that temperature range that we benefit from.
But then also, always the hardest to put a monetary value on is cultural services. Recreation, aesthetics, education, even spiritual connection to the environment has real value to humans.
We'll return to that, but what I mostly want to say is that I've, and the reason why here in Applied Economics we're known for this, is we've worked extensively with the Natural Capital Project, which is an organization, that Steve Glaske founded, 23 years ago.
And it's a partnership of a whole bunch of institutions.
Including Stanford and University of Minnesota are the two academic ones at the top. Stanford's really the central node now. We've had others join over time, but interestingly, it also has members from environmental organizations like the Nature Conservancy or the World Wildlife Fund, and we continue to add others there.
What we're known for is a tool called Invest, which is the Integrated Valuation of Ecosystem Services and Trade-offs.
We'll also have a full lecture on this, but I just want to introduce it now so we see how it fits in with the rest of this. It's a set of 20-plus open-source ecosystem service models where it essentially encapsulates the sort of consensus science
On how a biophysical process can be expressed as a production function of ecosystem services that humans value.
And so we've done lots and lots of projects about that, and I'll get into that at a later point. But the reason I wanted to raise this is ecosystem services
sort of started one area of research in this frontier of adding more complexity on Earth and econ systems, and so it's been seminal in this role.
In the paper, though.
You know, ecosystem services are just one type of the models that we use to define the space. And so, you can write these down, but we will have a lecture on most of these. But to orient them.
The first one is integrated assessment models, and the World 3 model that we talked about was sort of the first integrated assessment model. They're integrated in the sense that they combine the economy and the environment, and they have… they're sort of the oldest models that try to do this. As economists, though, we sometimes have a hard time talking with people in this domain.
because we're obsessed with one type of integrated assessment model, which in the paper we talked about as climate integrated assessment models. And so, we'll return to this also, but, like, the DICE model is sort of the famous model by Nobel Prize-winning economist William Nordhaus.
that use the principles of economics, but integrated with a climate model to calculate what is the optimal amount of mitigation of climate damages should we spend. So, in other words, essentially, how much
how much does climate matter from the economist's perspective? And so, tons of work has been on the econ side, and that's been almost exclusively focused on just climate aspects.
But in the paper, we discuss this whole other realm of comprehensive IAMs, and we called it comprehensive because it's basically climate plus everything else.
And the main thing it added was land. And so there's lots of models that will have detailed representations of land processes, or how do we use our stock of land in a way that we can understand what's the impact on all the other sectors and also our ecosystem services.
Other models we reviewed, we'll talk about this one for two full lectures, computable general equilibrium.
If you're taking the 8000 sequence in our Applied Econ course here, you will learn about general equilibrium, right? It's great theory. You'll learn about it from the perspective of using calculus and first-order conditions to solve for the different things we can, like
through Roy's identity and all those other graphs that I put on, or figures that I put on the board. From here, though, we'll only talk about it from the perspective of using coding to run CGEs. We'll still rely on the sort of intuition and knowledge about how general equilibriums work. That would still be very useful, but we'll focus on the calculation of them.
Another one is DSGEs. Similar, but they're dynamic and stochastic. This is what Federal Reserves use when they're trying to make predictions about what's going to happen under different fiscal scenarios and such. And so, you know, DSGEs, I guess I didn't write them up here.
are much more on this part of the domain. They have very complex economic decision-making, but very little environmental complexity, if any at all. And
Sort of an example of what level of complexity that they have is they solve for optimal allocation of resources over time.
And so the agents in the DSGE are actually thinking optimally, like, how should I be spending my resources now, given what I think is going to happen in 100 years? Well, not 100, because we don't live that long. But the point is, it's…
I can't think that far, but it's obviously harder to solve when you're thinking all your agents are perfectly foresighted and solving the optimization over time.
That's what economists do so.
Ecosystem services, then, is the one that I introduced as sort of filling out this space that's down here.
And we always knew that ecosystem services depended on economic activities, but a lot of the history of using ecosystem service models
Didn't connect directly to economic models, and instead just tried to assess different scenarios, of, like, well, what would happen if the economy did this, rather than being tightly linked?
The last few models, then, are ones that made this linkage possible. So, land use change models, we'll spend a day, for sure, on this, asks the question of how could you take a prediction from a decon model
On something like the usage of land.
And
say, not just at a country scale, how much land use change is there, but at a specific high-resolution land use land cover map, where is that change going to happen? I'll dig more into that in a second. But that was sort of a critical link that allowed us to combine ecosystem service models computationally with the econ models.
Okay, in the paper, though, I'll skip this, but we also talk about many more models. There's tons of domain-specific models, like hydrology models, climate models, soil movement models, etc, that have been paired occasionally with different economic questions, and this represents a whole huge frontier of where we could have, you know, advances of better linking
the Earth and the economy.
Okay.
So that's a bit of the typology in the history, but I'm going to slow down a second.
As we started to link models in this space.
There's a tantalizing question that emerged, and I'm kind of curious here what everybody thinks about it. We were asked, it's probably been asked.
Endlessly, since probably 1972, the question of, how much is nature worth?
to the economy.
And there's lots of ways you could express this. Probably the easiest way is what percentage of global GDP is nature responsible for?
And so… We got asked this by specific people, but I'm curious, if you had to guess a percentage.
What percentage would you all think it is?
Is it zero?
That's easy, right? But isn't that exactly what basic econ assumes?
Yeah, that's the problem, so… We know it's not going to be zero, but what is it?
What are some estimates? What are some… second question, methods that you might use for digging into this?
Yeah, like a dependency ratio, like, maybe agriculture is, like, 50% dependent, but but something like software design is only 1%.
Yep, that's done in the literature a lot.
Others?
You probably know the name for that too, right? Contingent Valuation?
Yep, that's… that's, one of the earliest slides, right, we talked… Jay Coggins will talk about that, is you could just basically ask people, do surveys, etc, how much would you be willing to pay for this? You know, I'm sure Jay will talk about that famous study where they sent checks
in the mail to people and said, you can either take this check and make it your money, or you could send a portion of it back to preserve wetlands. And just observing how much money people sent back was one way to estimate the value. That's… that's true.
Problem with that, though, is, how do you go from, you know, observation about specific individuals to the whole system, right? Like, do we assume everybody's the same?
What other methods, or what problems might you have when you try to go not from the question of specific ecosystem service values or specific people, but, like, the whole system? What problems might there be?
What's that?
Sorry, I'm having a hard time hearing.
Yep.
That's… that's a very good one.
Any system-wide things that you might have to learn about?
People are not rational, yes.
Actually, this has been one of the biggest criticisms of ecosystem services values, is people, when they're asked in a contingent valuation survey how much do they care about nature, you know, maybe they're going to say $200 per hectare of ocean land preserved is what they care about. But when you multiply the amount of area in the ocean times this dollar value, you get numbers that are potentially larger than all of
with GDP, and so there might be problems there.
I pointed in a specific direction, though, and with an example. There is an asteroid.
That is made up almost completely of diamond. It's, I forget the exact weight, but it's about 2 tons of diamond, and it is possible that we could capture this diamond. And if you look at the current price of diamonds.
and multiplied by the size of this asteroid, it would, if we somehow were able to catch it, bring it into Earth, it would increase our GDP by 15 quintillion dollars.
Does that make sense?
Would we really be that much better off if we captured this asteroid?
What might happen instead?
Would the price of diamonds still be so high if we suddenly had a… sorry, more than 2 tons, it was, like, hundreds of tons. We had essentially limitless diamonds. What would happen to the price of diamonds?
go down. We would not be dramatically better off if we suddenly had tons and tons of available diamonds from the space. Maybe we could drill a little bit better, because they're useful in industrial applications, but essentially, this is what we call a general equilibrium effect.
Is that if you go from a partial equilibrium estimate of diamonds are worth, you know, $10,000 per carat, or whatever, and assume that that holds, and then scale it up to the whole economy.
and assume that it won't change, you're gonna get ridiculous numbers. And that is just an example of there, we would say, general equilibrium effects would dominate the diamond market. In other words.
Diamonds will be free. I guess it'd be a prettier world, maybe, that's cool. But we wouldn't be dramatically better off, and the value of diamonds would fall to zero.
And what I would argue is that that's the same problem that we have with the environment, is,
we can look at the value of a given hectare, but it's not obvious what are the general equilibrium effects when we either scale it to the whole economy, or when we start to lose all of it. And so, this has been a question that had been plaguing environmental economists, and we had not many really good ways of answering this with the tools that we had. You can't just take
Contingent valuation numbers and scale them up to the whole economy, because that just raises general equilibrium problems.
But actually, we got asked this specifically by the World Wildlife Fund. They really wanted to know what is the total value of nature to the economy. When they initially asked this, I said, infinite. And that was my sort of joking answer, is because, can we live on Mars right now?
No.
So therefore, oxygen provision is essentially infinite in value, because we would not exist without it. That's not a very useful number, though, and frankly, I don't know how I could distinguish, is it infinite, or is it all of GDP, or… these are almost philosophical questions, but they're not very interesting.
But WDWF really wanted to know, and so…
They paid a bunch of consultants to answer the question of, how would you try to put quantitatively rigorous estimates on the total value of nature?
And there was a series of reports that came out. They asked a bunch of experts. I'll share this one on our table as an optional reading, and it's got some of the most well-known people in the different models in this
space, like O'Neal Banerjee, Peter Verberg will be reading all of their stuff. But it was a very impressive, working group, and they were tasked with that report, and what they concluded
is…
For the modeling, well, you must use Invest, so that was kind of cool to see these outside experts saying our tool is good.
They also said the GTAP model, which we'll dive into the global trade analysis project model, is the gold standard for economy-wide modeling.
And their basic answer was, if you could link them, and they had it in a future phase, they didn't actually do it, they just said, this is what you should do. If you could do something like this, where you had GTAP,
Project what happens, in the economy.
Have that be plugged into a land use change model, and then have that affect the biodiversity and ecosystem services
If you could do one last step, the critical one that was missing, which is express the change in agricultural productivity, or whatever other impact and dependency pathways you have, back onto the economy.
and rerun the economic model with a change in productivity, or whatever else is going to change in the environment. You could then look at the resulting values of the econ model, like GDP, or like prices, or anything, and say that is attributable to the changes in the environment.
in a way that doesn't have these problems of general equilibrium effects just making it meaningless. And in fact, instead, it's basically embracing general equilibrium. The GTAP model, we'll learn a lot about this, is a general equilibrium model that says.
Every single price is determined by every other part of the economy, and so if you had diamonds, in this example, suddenly become super abundant.
a general equilibrium model would explicitly deal with that, like, okay, they're super abundant, what actually happens to the price? Well, it will fall to zero, and so it can deal with that, and you can get quantitative estimates of what might happen. And this is, you know, based on elasticities, all these other things we've learned throughout in economics.
But it's basically a systematic and
comprehensive and theoretically sound way of saying what would happen when these large changes happen. This led them, in that report, to create this ludicrously tantalizing figure, is why might we want to do this, where we link an econ model with a, with an environmental model? Is that…
this is the baseline forecast. This is how the world mostly thinks about things, but it is wrong. This is how Ministries of finance project, and they literally use GTAP to project something like, gross world product over time.
But it's missing something, and this is what WWF cared about, is, okay, yeah, but it didn't think about, well, pollinators, it has an effect on agricultural productivity.
And if we did the… I wish I had them on the same slide… if we did this calculation with the change in pollination, or whatever ecosystem services, instead of this naively optimistic graph upwards, we would have instead these headwinds, they sometimes call them, with something that causes GDP to not grow as much, and that, because of the degradation of
The environment, we would get this…
lesser growth trajectory here. And I guess you could say, then, the difference between this
And this, for any given year, is how much nature is worth. And that's… that's a really well-argued proposition. It's much better than multiplying the dollar value of diamonds times all the diamonds, or thinking about the dollar value of a hectare of forestry and multiplying it by the whole Amazon.
And so,
This was, I think, a really important paper. I'll share it. It was 2017, and then published formally in 2020. But they weren't totally bluffing.
They weren't just thinking about this as a possible route forward, they were also simultaneously working on developing an important model called IEM.
I hate saying that, it's hard to say. But anyways, it's the Integrated Economic Environment Modeling Platform. And it captures the dynamics exactly as described in that figure of economy, to land use change, to ecosystem services, back to economy.
Yeah.
This one?
So, just stay the atheist.
Yes. Yeah, so this is a great point, is… This argument here.
The idea that this gap here is the value of nature, it certainly does depend on how much does this deviate from the baseline, but it also critically depends on what's your assumptions about the baseline.
And so the GTAP model, that's why it's so broadly used in, like, finance and, and banking circles, is it's really good for that question of, taking different assumptions on, essentially, population growth.
total factor productivity, and a few other things. From there, they endogenously calculate GDP going out into the future. And so, you know, it's not flawless, it's often wrong, you know, obviously.
you know, economists are made fun of for not seeing the 2008 financial crisis coming, for instance, or something. So, you know, it's not perfect, but it's laser-focused on this idea of
And we take some assumptions and make reasonable projections, for future… for future things. And that's a very insightful comment you make, because, yeah, the…
What the trajectory of this is, is also unknown, and is very… and very much determines what's the total value of nature.
Yeah, any other thoughts on that?
you can make a lot of money by projecting just this line. There's a lot of money spent on trying to project economic growth into the future, especially when you're in the GTAP world, because that can say not just what's total economic growth, but which sectors will increase or decrease, and
how might you use that information? Well, you could… you could place financial bets on that and make a lot of money. And so, yes, that's why there's a lot of interest in this type of modeling.
Great question.
But yeah, so IEM, essentially, was one of those models that tried to do this, and it tried to explicitly include non-material regulating and cultural ecosystem services. And the key thing that they identified was that
if you can get a land use land cover map, and we'll say more about that when we get into our spatial components, and plug that in using high resolution, you can then use INVEST, there's another model called ARIES out there, to estimate the ecosystem service provision at a spatial level.
but then plug that back into the economy. And they have some great resources that I'll share after class.
And here, if you do like math, this is where the math gets intense. Solving the mathematical structure. Unlike what you'd get over in our econ theory colleagues on the west bank of this university, that's not going to be just one sector, it's going to be, you know, 50 sectors, and so you'd have… you quickly find yourself dealing with thousands of equations.
And trying to solve those. And so, it becomes unsolvable using traditional methods, and so it uses, numerical approximation methods.
But, yeah, so no Bellmans. You can only use the Bellmans in very simplified cases. But anyways, this is still a very well-documented part, and we'll dive deep into it. It's a very good research topic.
But this was really the first
time that the back linkage… I've already erased it, but I have that picture here of the cycle. This is one of the first ones in the literature that looked at this, is… yeah, there's what were the waste products, right? Affluence emissions, environmental investments is there too, but this
That called back language, anyone's going forward into the right. But the idea that, ecosystem services
Affect the economy, and more than just the provisioning ecosystem services, like timber and fish, but also these non-provisioning services, like soil, and land availability.
And that led to the idea of Earth economy modeling itself. It basically was the first earth economy model, with one big caveat, is that it was only computable at small country scales.
And so, the work that… so, in other words,
you can think about it as being really high up in this space, in the complexity space, but with the caveat that it's not global. And so that's its way of dealing with the computational budget, is you can make things computationally easy by saying, let's only compute it for a small area, and that works.
In the paper, though, we essentially argued that that's… we don't need to stop there. We argued that Earth economy models
No, I'll leave this here.
So, Earth Economy Model definition.
It's five characteristics. One, global.
Why is this necessary? Because if we think about climate change.
or taking 30% of our land and putting it into nature reserves to protect it. These are global policies. If you ever look at it in a specific country, it's really easy to get confused. I'll… another article we'll be discussing, I'll share, shows that, it's really clever. It looks at, using GTAP, what would happen if there was a large increase
in protection of palm oil, right? I mentioned this before. You can actually compute, using a general equilibrium model, to what degree will other countries just benefit from the fact that one country restricted itself, right? If one country stops producing palm oil in an environmentally harmful way, other countries might just benefit from the fact that now the scarcity of palm oil
push the price up, and they will increase their environmental degradation. And if you don't have a global scope, all of your estimates are going to be underestimates, or rather, overly optimistic estimates of how effective your policy is, and so it will be misleading.
But it also needs to be general equilibrium.
Again, just meaning that all markets are related, so we don't have the, diamonds, infinite GDP problem.
But we argued that the state variable of this
Shouldn't be just like how economists normally do it, like a vector of production goods, but actually a high-resolution
input, phrasing it slightly different, to the Earth systems models.
Coupled with high-resolution economic actors.
high-res econ. That sounds kind of funny, right? High-resolution economic actor? What does that mean? We're not going to take a single number for the globe. That would be a very coarse economic actor, the globe. I guess higher resolution to be countries, maybe we want to be even more specific to have lots of little units, little countries.
But also different sectors, different types of goods and services. And so, this essentially means computable general equilibrium, where we have these many different sectors and thousands of equations.
But then finally, and this was the key point that was added by Ayem, the two-way endogenous linkage.
Is that we need to have it in general equilibrium, but it needs to be that more general, general equilibrium, where the econ is embedded in the environment, so that there is this way that the economy affects the environment through impacts, but also is dependent on it through these different dependencies and impact pathways.
What that means in more practical terms… I'm gonna go to this one instead. This is the figure that was, in the annual reviews paper, as we tried to come up with a theoretical framing for what an earth economy model looks like.
And so this, you might notice, I'm even using the same colors as I did last lecture, where we had different boxes, right? I had the blue box for the economy, and the green box for Earth. Here is where we try to spell it out, and…
Let's walk through each of these components, is that we would have
some sort of econ model, that's well understood. We'll be using GTAP, but the idea is that it generates, a pressure on the environment, especially as felt through land use change.
And so the economy model gives us inputs to the land use change model.
Which gives us inputs into the ecosystem service model.
which finally comes around, to the fourth type of model, the impacts and dependencies model. And so we'll be, in the rest of this course, walking through each of these components and running, on your computer, running some of these,
for how to link these four different parts. And the reason why this is useful is, once you have all these parts, then the difference in GDP produced by the econ model before and after you have these environmental impacts and dependencies.
That's going to be the value of… of nature in this correct general equilibrium framing.
And so, one specific model that we'll talk about is this one. You don't need to write this down, because we'll have a day on it, but,
This is using the same framing, but instead of just having general terms of the earth and the economy, this is what we developed in our research lab here, is we, for the economy, had the GTAP model, which we'll run. Then we had a land use change model called SEALS, and then we had the invest set of ecosystem service models that I talked about earlier. The least developed
Set of models.
that still kind of needs a name, but are the impacts and dependency pathway models. These are, how do ecosystem services get, expressed as shocks into the econ model? That's the last component.
And that also gives us a bit of a preview of where we'll be going with this course. And so, this is just to go real fast, you don't need to write this down, but we'll talk about what are the details of the econ model. How do we think about the land supply curve, for instance, in this model?
how do we actually take those results? And the answer is a lot of machine learning, it's fun.
But then we also will talk about the calculation of ecosystem services globally. The sort of actual reason why this frontier is still a frontier and is not yet fully saturated is because that computational budget was really looming. It was a really difficult constraint throughout all of this, and so it was only actually in
this now-famous paper, Chaplin Kramer et al. 2019, that anybody was able to first compute ecosystem services at a global scale.
And so that was basically a prerequisite for doing any of the sort of modeling of the impacts of ecosystem services. And so once that was done, then suddenly this whole domain is possible, and there's been many advances in there.
But just computing things like sediment retention, climate regulation, pollination, coastal protection. For each of these, there's a different biophysical pathway you need to understand. Like, so, for instance, sediment retention, the little image in the background, that's erosion, right? That's…
That's going to be water running down a hill, and this is going to be a function of all sorts of things, like the climate inputs, how much water happens, what's the soil. Critically, what is the topography of the landscape? Because if you have a perfectly flat landscape, you'll get one type of erosion, and if you have a farm that is on hills, you'll have a very different type, and anybody who's a farmer knows it's really hard to plant on hills.
Both because your machines can't drive there, but mostly because your soil will get eroded away. And so you actually need to have a hydrological model that computes where will the erosion happen, given the soil and the topography. Anyways, that's why the computation is challenging.
But yeah, so then we'll talk about the last step, which is the newest. Once we do have these global ecosystem services.
how can we then use those as inputs into the economic model? And so, to highlight a few of them, they could be changes in the production efficiency. So you have a production function that is now a slightly different shape. Or you could have a change in the amount of
Your endowment. How much land of different types is available for production?
You could have shifts in supply and demand for different sectors, reflecting all sorts of things, like, for instance, what if everybody becomes vegetarian? That will have a big economic impact, right? We can actually calculate that. What would that be? And that could be expressed here. And throughout all of this, the sort of cool part is we can directly calculate individual welfare as contingent or equivalent variation.
And so, we're actually cutting all the way to the core of why very traditional economists like economics, which is that you can prove the basic welfare theorems to show what will be the impact on humans' well-being.
I want to spend the last 5 minutes, or 4 minutes maybe, to just give a quick discussion of, sort of, trajectory of this work. It's…
It really got going, you know, that first project that the World Wildlife Fund started in 2017, and right after they, published their first set of results.
A new community of people really got interested in this, and this is banks.
And so the biggest surprise for us, was from this line of research, which we'll dive into more, central banks, but also ministries of finance.
And also then the, sort of multilateral development banks, like the World Bank, the IMF, the Asian Inter-American Development Bank, all of these got really interested in this, this research. And so, I have a few funny pictures here. This is me. I logged on, you can see there's 153 participants, plus this big imposing room of people.
I was under the impression that this was going to be a working group of about 12 people, and I logged on to this, and this is what I was presenting to. I'm like, oh my goodness, I was not ready for this.
Here's another one, the Chileans invited us down. And so, this, this beefy guy here, see that guy? He's, like, the one protecting the vault. We actually got to go in and see, like, he was just the first line of security, there was a lot more security, but we got to go into the Federal Reserve Bank of Chile, and I'm quite happy.
Where, you know, we got to present… this is me presenting at the annual conference of their central bank. And so, this kind of exploded. It kind of took off. It's been fun. And so, the Chilean Central Bank has been a big one. The Norwegian Central… this is the Norwegian Bank Investment Management, but this is the Norwegian Sovereign Wealth Fund, also known as the biggest wealth fund in the world. They have four point-something trillion
invested. Essentially, they had a bunch of oil that they decided to put into a sovereign fund to benefit their individuals, and now they're super wealthy. But they are interested in how can they look at the risks to their fund from changes in nature. And so.
Part of it is they're good citizens of the world, and they want to help us understand how to navigate sustainability crises.
But also, there's a selfish interest. They want to understand
How can our investment, which is global in scope, be better informed about the risks
the systemic risks of nature collapse. And so, that's why central banks got really interested in this. They saw this as a way of finally answering some of the questions of why or how could we get quantitatively rigorous
estimates of where our financial system is at risk. Lots of people are very afraid of collapses or bubbles, or other sorts of problems that could arise and just wreak havoc on the economy, and this actually falls then within the mandate of central banks.
They're responsible for controlling inflation, that's the number one thing that the law says they have to do. But in most countries, they also have to, maintain the stability of the overall system.
And financial risks are one… I'm sorry, environmental risks are one that they have a lot of interest in protecting. And so, down here, we have NAPCAP Teams. This is our first logo. I made this one in PowerPoint, and I'm an awful graphic designer. We have a much better one now, but I thought I'd leave it here.
Show how bad of a graphic designer I am.
I had to wear suits all this. Oh, and this is the most recent one. I should have had a better picture, but this is, where I was 5 days ago. This is in the Central Bank of France. They're now also big in this, and this is the, this picture doesn't do it justice, but this is the Golden Hall. And some…
weird, really rich person in the 1700s decided he wanted to create the most gold-covered room of all time. And so this… everything in here is made of gold.
And so it's not even open to the public for obvious reasons, but it's kind of fun. The bankers let us do lots of fun things, and so we got to hang out here for a while. The reason I'm raising all this is not just to say how cool traveling to France was.
or justification for I'm really tired because I'm jet-lagged from coming back from this still, but rather just to say, it's an exciting field. Yes, it will feel a little bit chaotic studying this, because it's a brand new area, and…
on the other hand, that's good for two reasons. One, it's always good when people with lots of money like you, because you get to go to golden rooms, or maybe they provide research funding for you, is the more tangible thing. They'll be able to break off a chunk of gold, and there, that funds our research left. But the second one is, it's what I call a research topic-rich environment. If you're doing econometrics, and you're going to try to study
what is the relationship between, you know, giving eyeglasses to students and seeing what the impact on their educational outcomes are? That's a really interesting topic. It's also really well studied.
And so it's hard to distinguish your research.
You need to have a better data set, or maybe a really clever econometric advance to really be able to make your case.
this is the opposite. There are tons of things that are not at all researched on this. It's a target-rich environment, and so if you can manage this sort of large space and the fact that it's a new and evolving discipline, I think you'll find it very invigorating, because almost anything you do is going to have new research that needs to be done. And that means you can easily get a PhD topic out of this, or things that are publishable.
You don't have to worry about somebody scooping you, because it's all new.
So…
We will spend the rest of the semester now diving in to those models. And so this was still, again, a not very applied day, but we… it's now set, hopefully, the framework to dive into the specific applied tools.
Sorry, I went one minute over because I got excited. Thanks, everybody. I'll stick around for questions, and you know, again, I have an open-door policy. Please feel free. I've already had a couple people stop by. If you have any questions, concerns,
please do not hesitate to reach out to me, this is the thing I care the most about, so please do.
Thanks, everybody.
Bye, everybody online!